Change default propagator in unconfigured API (#930)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/context/api-propagators.md

## Global Propagators

OpenTelemetry API should provide a way to obtain a propagator for each supported
`Propagator` type. Instrumentation library SHOULD call propagators to extract
and inject context on all remote calls. Propagators depending on the language
MAY be set up using various dependency injection techniques or available as

> global accessors.

Reviewer: This paragraph duplicates the next section "Get Global Propagator"

Reviewer 2: > OpenTelemetry API should provide a way to obtain a propagator for each supported
each supported `Propagator` type.	`Propagator`

I think that's very general - we already have specific sections describing where the B3/Jaeger propagators [will live](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/context/api-propagators.md#propagators-distribution), although we are missing `TraceContext` (which I planned to do as a follow up).

Reviewer 2: > MAY be set up using various dependency injection techniques or available

Any reason to add this note? Global Propagators are something expected to be overridden by the final user, thus I don't remember seeing them as injection-based. Is that the case for .Net perhaps?

Author: Yes, DI is used in some parts of .NET: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/c1c181b98c9f420ab25c538397dc3f3ed452d97f/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore/AspNetCoreInstrumentationOptions.cs#L28-L35

**Note:** it is discouraged practice, but certain instrumentation libraries

> might use proprietary context propagation protocols or default into a specific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might use proprietary context propagation protocols or be hardcoded to use a specific
```

Reviewer 2: Is the proprietary protocol part related to .Net as well? Just curious ;)

Author: Kind of. ASP.NET can support legacy correlation header. But I was mostly referring to a different case. We met this use case in the azure sdk that were using azure-specific headers historically and wasn't ready to move from it. I don't know what the final and long term resolution specifically in that case, but I can imagine it may be the case in other situations. This note is to explain why I used SHOULD above.

> one. In such cases, instrumentation library MAY choose not to call use supplied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one. In such cases, instrumentation library MAY choose not to use the API-provided
```

propagators and instead hardcode the context extract and inject logic.

OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators when used unconfigured. Context
propagation may be used for various telemetry signals - traces, metrics, logging

> and more. Platforms such as ASP.NET may pre-configure out-of-the-box

Reviewer: > Context propagation may be used for various telemetry signals

While true, what is the purpose of stating this here?

Author: clarified.

> and more. Platforms such as ASP.NET may pre-configure out-of-the-box

Reviewer: > Platforms such as ASP.NET

So .NET without ASP will work differently?

> and more. Platforms such as ASP.NET may pre-configure out-of-the-box

Reviewer: > Platforms

Clarification is needed that SDKs are not considered platforms by default, so they MUST use no-op.

Reviewer 2: @Oberon00 I'm not sure we want to disallow SDKs the right to override the default values. Any reason to not do so?

Reviewer: Hmm, actually I would be fine with that. So ASP.NET does only provide an API, no SDK, but still sets a different default propagator?

Author: ASP.NET without any logging enabled would not propagate. Once logging is enabled, it starts propagation as it uses identifiers for logs.

Reviewer 2: > So ASP.NET does only provide an API, no SDK, but still sets a different default propagator?

Yes, I can imagine this scenario being supported.

And for clarity purposes: I think any component should be able to _override_ the default values (ASP.NET, SDK, etc).

Author: this seems to be resolved, correct?

## Global Propagators

> OpenTelemetry API should provide a way to obtain a propagator for each supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API should provide a way to obtain a propagator for each supported
```

> The OpenTelemetry API should provide a way to obtain a propagator for each supported

Reviewer: should, SHOULD or MUST?

Reviewer 2: Actually I'd prefer to have this as a MAY - we still need to decide whether `TraceContext` and `Baggage` Propagators will be in the API or in a separate package (the latter seemed to have slightly more approvals).

Author: I'd go with MUST. Not much use of API if there is no way to propagate context. @carlosalberto are you thinking of the long term vision where context just floats without the need for any API? Is it why you suggest "MAY"?

Reviewer 2: Fine with going with MUST, as this is what we have right now. Observe that we already specified that, at least for B3 and Jaeger, the Propagators ought to live in [extension packages](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/context/api-propagators.md#propagators-distribution) - so you may need to be concise and mention Baggage + TraceContext here.

Author: this is about API surface. API must provide a means to help with extracting and injecting the context without the need to import special propagation package.

> `Propagator` type. Instrumentation library SHOULD call propagators to extract

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Propagator` type. Instrumentation libraries SHOULD call propagators to extract
```

> and inject context on all remote calls. Propagators depending on the language

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and inject the context on all remote calls. Propagators depending on the language
```

MAY be set up using various dependency injection techniques or available as
global accessors.

> **Note:** it is discouraged practice, but certain instrumentation libraries

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** it is a discouraged practice, but certain instrumentation libraries
```

might use proprietary context propagation protocols or be hardcoded to use a

> specific one. In such cases, instrumentation library MAY choose not to use the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specific one. In such cases, instrumentation libraries MAY choose not to use the
```

> API-provided propagators and instead hardcode the context extract and inject

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
API-provided propagators and instead hardcode the context extraction and injection
```

logic.

> OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators when used unconfigured. Context

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators when used unconfigured. Context
```

> The OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators when used unconfigured. Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators unless explicitly configured otherwise. Context
```

Author: thank you, applied

propagation may be used for various telemetry signals - traces, metrics, logging

> and more. So context propagation MAY be enabled for any of them. For instance,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and more. Therefore, context propagation MAY be enabled for any of them. For instance,
```

> and more. Therefore, context propagation MAY be enabled for any of them. For instance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and more. Therefore, context propagation MAY be enabled for any of them indepentely. For instance,
```

Author: thank you, applied

> trace exporter may not be configured while trace context is propagated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a span exporter may be left unconfigured, although the trace context is being propagated.
```

> a span exporter may be left unconfigured, although the trace context is being propagated.

Reviewer: That example does not fit the previous sentence. This here would be an example that recording of some signal is independent of propagation of cross-process correlation data for that signal.

Author: clarified, PTAL

Platforms such as ASP.NET may pre-configure out-of-the-box
propagators. If pre-configured, `Propagator`s SHOULD default to a composite
`Propagator` containing the W3C Trace Context Propagator and the Baggage

> `Propagator` specified in [api-baggage.md](../baggage/api.md#serialization). Platform MUST also allow to disable pre-configured propagators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Propagator` specified in [api-baggage.md](../baggage/api.md#serialization). These platforms MUST also allow pre-configured propagators to be disabled.
```

> `Propagator` specified in [api-baggage.md](../baggage/api.md#serialization). These platforms MUST also allow pre-configured propagators to be disabled.

Reviewer 2: Not clear to me whether you meant *overriding* the pre-configured `Propagator`s or  disabling pre-configuring the `Propagator`s.

Reviewer 2: Ping @SergeyKanzhelev 

Let's definitely try to get this PR merged *soon* ;)

Author: clarified, PTAL

## Global Propagators

The OpenTelemetry API MUST provide a way to obtain a propagator for each
supported `Propagator` type. Instrumentation libraries SHOULD call propagators
to extract and inject the context on all remote calls. Propagators, depending on
the language, MAY be set up using various dependency injection techniques or

> available as global accessors.

Reviewer 4: What's meant by "global accessors"? Via global getters?
We could also more generically say "available as global properties on the API".

Author: I think what's written is also generic enough. Let me know if this is blocking

Reviewer 4: Not blocking (I already approved the PR) but a bit unclear to me.

> **Note:** it is a discouraged practice, but certain instrumentation libraries

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Note:** It is a discouraged practice, but certain instrumentation libraries
```

might use proprietary context propagation protocols or be hardcoded to use a
specific one. In such cases, instrumentation libraries MAY choose not to use the
API-provided propagators and instead hardcode the context extraction and injection
logic.

The OpenTelemetry API MUST use no-op propagators unless explicitly configured
otherwise. Context propagation may be used for various telemetry signals -
traces, metrics, logging and more. Therefore, context propagation MAY be enabled
for any of them independently. For instance, a span exporter may be left
unconfigured, although the trace context propagation was configured to enrich logs or metrics.

Platforms such as ASP.NET may pre-configure out-of-the-box
propagators. If pre-configured, `Propagator`s SHOULD default to a composite
`Propagator` containing the W3C Trace Context Propagator and the Baggage

> `Propagator` specified in [api-baggage.md](../baggage/api.md#serialization). These platforms MUST also allow pre-configured propagators to be disabled or overridden.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`Propagator` specified in [api-baggage.md](../baggage/api.md#serialization).
These platforms MUST also allow pre-configured propagators to be disabled or overridden.
```
